Add documentation for refactoring actions (#2414)
apple/sourcekit-lsp: Documentation/Refactoring Actions.md

# Refactoring Actions

SourceKit-LSP exposes refactoring capabilities through the LSP Code Actions API. When you trigger code actions in your editor (typically via the lightbulb icon or keyboard shortcut), SourceKit-LSP returns available refactorings for the current selection.

## How to Invoke Refactoring Actions

Code actions show up automatically in LSP-compatible editors. Common ways to trigger them:

- **VS Code**: `Cmd+.` (macOS) or `Ctrl+.` (Windows/Linux)
- **Neovim** (with nvim-lspconfig): `:lua vim.lsp.buf.code_action()`

The specific refactorings available depend on what code is selected or where the cursor is positioned.

## Available Refactorings

SourceKit-LSP provides refactoring actions from multiple sources:

### Semantic Refactorings (via sourcekitd)

These refactorings require full semantic analysis of the code and are provided by the Swift compiler's sourcekitd.

> #### Cursor-Based Refactorings

Author: oh okaey on it currently working on the test case , looks a bit tricky , ill come baxk to this after a while 🤗

| **Convert integer literal** | Cursor on an integer literal (converts between decimal, hex, octal, binary) |
| **Convert string literal to minimal number of '#'s** | Cursor on a raw string literal with unnecessary `#` delimiters |
| **Create Codable structs from JSON** | Cursor inside JSON content in a Swift file |

### Functions and Closures

| Action | Trigger |
|--------|---------|
| **Extract Method** | Select one or more statements |
| **Extract Expression** | Select a single expression |
| **Extract Repeated Expression** | Select an expression that appears multiple times |
| **Convert To Trailing Closure** | Cursor inside a function call where the last argument is a non-trailing closure |
| **Convert to computed property** | Cursor on a zero-parameter function declaration |
| **Convert to zero parameter function** | Cursor on a read-only computed property |
| **Add documentation** | Cursor on a function, type, property, or macro declaration |

### Async/Await

| Action | Trigger |
|--------|---------|
| **Convert Call to Async Alternative** | Cursor on a call to a function with a completion handler |

> | **Convert Function to Async** | Cursor on a function declaration with a completion handler parameter |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Convert Function to Async** | Cursor on base name of a function not marked as `async` |
```

| **Add Async Alternative** | Cursor on a function declaration with a completion handler parameter |

> | **Add Async Wrapper** | Cursor on a function declaration with a completion handler parameter |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Add Async Alternative** | Cursor on base name of a function with an escaping completion handler parameter |
| **Add Async Wrapper** | Cursor on base name of a function with an escaping completion handler parameter |
```

### Control Flow

| Action | Trigger |
|--------|---------|

> | **Expand Default** | Cursor on a `default:` case in a switch over an enum |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Expand Default** | Cursor on the `default` keyword in a switch over an enum |
```

| **Expand Switch Cases** | Cursor on the `switch` keyword when switching over an enum with unhandled cases |
| **Collapse Nested If Statements** | Cursor on an if statement that contains only another if statement |
| **Convert To Do/Catch** | Cursor on a `try?` or `try!` expression |
| **Expand Ternary Expression** | Select a ternary conditional expression (`a ? b : c`) |
| **Convert To Ternary Expression** | Select an if/else that assigns or returns a value |

> | **Convert To Guard Expression** | Select an if-let binding |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Convert To Guard Expression** | Select an if-let statement |
```

| **Convert To IfLet Expression** | Select a guard-let statement |
| **Convert To Switch Statement** | Select an if/else-if chain comparing the same value |
| **Migrate to shorthand 'if let' syntax** | Cursor on `if let x = x` (converts to `if let x`) |

### Types and Protocols

| Action | Trigger |
|--------|---------|
| **Add Missing Protocol Requirements** | Cursor on a type name that has unsatisfied protocol requirements |
| **Generate Memberwise Initializer** | Cursor on a struct or class name that has stored properties |

> | **Add Equatable Conformance** | Cursor on a struct or class declaration |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Add Equatable Conformance** | Cursor on a type name that has stored properties and does not conform to `Equatable` |
```

| **Add Explicit Codable Implementation** | Cursor on a type with `Codable` conformance |

> | **Move To Extension** | Select one or more member declarations inside a type |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Move To Extension** | Select one or more member declarations inside a type which aren’t stored properties |
```

> | **Convert To Computed Property** | Select a stored property with an initializer |

Reviewer: This also works with variable declarations inside functions, not just stored properties.

```suggestion
| **Convert To Computed Property** | Select a variable declaration with an initializer |
```

## How to Invoke Refactoring Actions

Code actions show up automatically in LSP-compatible editors. Common ways to trigger them:

- **VS Code**: `Cmd+.` (macOS) or `Ctrl+.` (Windows/Linux)
- **Neovim** (with nvim-lspconfig): `:lua vim.lsp.buf.code_action()`
- **Xcode**: Right-click → Refactor menu

The specific refactorings available depend on what code is selected or where the cursor is positioned.

## Available Refactorings

SourceKit-LSP provides refactoring actions from multiple sources:

### Semantic Refactorings (via sourcekitd)

These refactorings require full semantic analysis of the code:

| Action | Description | Trigger |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| **Extract Method** | Extracts selected statements into a new function | Select a range of complete statements |
| **Localize String** | Wraps a string literal for localization | Cursor inside a string literal |
| **Expand Macro** | Shows the expanded form of a macro | Cursor on a macro invocation |

> | **Inline Macro** | Inlines the expansion of a freestanding macro | Cursor on a macro invocation |

Reviewer: sourcekitd provides quite a few more refactorings, listed in 

https://github.com/swiftlang/swift/blob/9b452820367ccc7b5d9effbc1565bcd945c81768/include/swift/Refactoring/RefactoringKinds.def#L21-L92

The main problem with these refactorings is that they are currently pretty sensitive to which range you select in your source code. That’s why they are harder to discover. If you want to go the extra mile and test that all of the functions can be invoked and document which part of the source code you need to select to get them, that would be very helpful to surface them.
